Moldova, Republic of:  Ill-treatment and denial of adequate medical care for Mr. Oleksandr Lypovchenko
May 30, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionUrgent campaigns / Urgent Interventions / Moldova, Republic of / 2016 / MayMoldova, Republic of: Ill-treatment and denial of adequate medical care for Mr. Oleksandr LypovchenkoMDA 300516Allegations
 of ill-treatment/ Denial of adequate medical care/ Critical health 
conditions / Inhumane and degrading conditions of detentionThe International Secretariat of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) requests your URGENT intervention in the following situation in the Republic of Moldova / Transnistria.Brief Description of the SituationThe
 International Secretariat of OMCT has been informed by reliable sources
 about the ill-treatment and denial of adequate medical care of Mr. Oleksandr Lypovchenko,
 a 37-year-old Ukrainian citizen, held in Prison n°3 in Tiraspol, 
Transnistria, also known as the Pridnestrovian Moldavian 
Republic (PMR)[1].According to the information received, Mr. 
Lypovchenko, who suffers of hepatitis C and a venous insufficiency 
called thrombophlebitis that untreated could cause 
complications, including death, has been detained since 7 July 2015. In a
 context of alleged acts of ill-treatment, poor conditions of detention,
 a systematic denial of appropriate medical care and two hunger strikes 
lasting for several months, his medical condition has reached a critical
 point since his diseases have widespread.In December 2015, he 
was extremely weak and exhausted when his mother visited him. In April 
2016, he could hardly move his legs, had yellow blotches because of the 
hepatitis, and was diagnosed by doctors of the prison with “oedema in 
the lower limbs”, as consequence of his thrombophlebitis. 
Mr. Lypovchenko has been denied the option of being examined by external
 doctors and all the requests for hospitalization would have been 
constantly rejected on the grounds that his health was satisfactory.Mr.
 Lypovchenko‘s case has been brought to the attention of the regional 
ombudsman, the ombudsman of Moldova, the Deputy Prime minister, the 
Bureau of reintegration of Moldova and the Ukrainian embassy in Moldova 
but his situation has not experienced any changes. Furthermore, 
representatives of the Ukrainian embassy in Moldova, visited 
the Tiraspol’s Prison No. 3 and assured that the condition of Mr. 
Lypovchenko was satisfactory, despite the fact that they wouldn’t have 
seen him in person.According to the information received, Mr. 
Oleksandr Lypovchenko was detained on 7 July 2015 by the so-called 
“investigation committee of inquiry of the PMR” and on 9 July 2015 the 
Court of Tiraspol emitted a preventive arrest order against him[2]. He 
was then placed during 10 days in the basement of the Pre-trail 
Detention Centre of the Tiraspol “Militia”. Then he was transferred to 
the Temporary Detention Isolator – TDI No. 3 Tiraspol in a 6x4 square 
meter cell shared with 8 other detainees with no drinkable water and was
 allowed to shower once a week. Mr. Lypovchenko went on hunger strike 
from the first day of his detention to approximately mid-October 2015. 
On 31 July 2015, he was transferred to the psychiatric department of the
 Republican Hospital in Tiraspol, where he remained until 11 August 
2015. Then, he was transferred back to to the Temporary Detention 
Isolator – TDI No. 3 Tiraspol in a cell of solitary confinement.According
 to the same information, in March 2016, Mr. Oleksandr Lypovchenko was 
hospitalized in the psychiatric section of the medical unit of Isolator 
No. 3 from Tiraspol. He was forced to psychiatric examination and 
administered psychotropic substances with used syringes. Despite appeals
 to the Minister of Justice of the Pridnestrovian Moldavian Republic, no
 explanation of the reason of this hospitalization was given. As a form 
of protest, Mr. Oleksandr Lypovchenko went newly on hunger strike on 
17 March 2016.On 7, 8 and 14 of April 2016 Mr. Oleksandr 
Lypovchenko was allegedly beaten in the kidneys by the guardians of 
Tiraspol’s Isolator No. 3, who used their fists and feet for 
this purpose. He was then placed, because of his hunger strike, in a 
solitary confinement cell, where he had to sleep on a concrete floor 
and, as a result, developed pneumonia. However, Mr. Lypovchenko has 
never received medical care or treatment for the injuries caused by the 
acts of ill-treatment he’d have allegedly suffered. On 15 April 2016, a 
request was sent to the Prosecutor’s Office of Bender to initiate a 
criminal investigation into the acts of torture and ill-treatment 
committed against Mr. Lypovchenko.In May 2016, Mr. Oleksandr 
Lypovchenko was transferred to the surgery ward of the medical Centre of
 Isolator No.3 because of his heath condition. Then, he ended his hunger
 strike on 19 May 2016, when he began to consume food, because he was 
allegedly administered preparations that stimulated the feeling of 
hunger.The OMCT is gravely concerned about the critical health 
condition of Mr. Oleksandr Lypovchenko and the vital threat that 
represents the constant denial of adequate medical care, and calls on 
the de facto Transnistrian authorities to urgently guarantee the 
physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Oleksandr Lypovchenko and 
immediately transfer him to specialized institutions where he can 
receive adequate medical care and treatment.The OMCT recalls to the de facto Transnistrian
 administration its responsibility to effectively ensure the physical 
and psychological integrity of all persons deprived of liberty 
in accordance with regional and international human rights law, and in 
particular the European Convention on Human Rights, the Convention 
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment of 
Punishment, and the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of 
Prisoners.Actions requestedPlease write to the de facto authorities of the Region of Transnistria, authorities of the Republic of Moldova, the Russian Federation urging them to:i.            Guarantee, in all circumstances, the physical and psychological integrity of Mr. Oleksandr Lypovchenko;ii. 
          Order the immediate transfer of Mr. Oleksandr Lypovchenko to 
specialized institutions or civil hospitals where he can receive 
adequate medical examination and adequate medical treatment for his 
diseases;iii.          Carry out a prompt, effective, thorough, 
independent and impartial investigation into the allegations of 
ill-treatment and torture inflicted on Mr. Oleksandr Lypovchenko;iv. 
         Ensure that adequate conditions of detention and medical 
services are guaranteed to all persons that have been deprived of 
liberty and detained in Transnistria, according notably to the UN 
Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners;v.        
  Ensure that adequate, effective and prompt reparation, including 
adequate compensation and rehabilitation, is granted to the victim 
concerned;vi.         Guarantee the respect of human rights and 
the fundamental freedoms throughout the country in accordance with 
national laws and international human rights standards.Please 
copy also to the Embassy of Ukraine to the Republic of Moldova, the OSCE
 Mission to Moldova, the EU Delegation to Moldova and the Council of 
Europe Office of Moldova.Addresses:De facto Transnistrian authorities:· 
      Yevgeny Shevchuk Vasilyevich, President of the PMR, MD-3300, 
ул. 25 Октября, 42, Tiraspol, Republic of Moldova; for on-line 
petitions: http://president.gospmr.ru/ru/letter· 
      Baranova Nadejda, Head of Presidential Executive Office, 53 
Gorkogo Str., Tiraspol, MD 3300, Republic of Moldova; for on-line 
petitions: http://president.gospmr.ru/ru/letter·       Bezbabchenko 
Andrey Ivanovich, Head of State Administration of Tiraspol, Str. 25 
Oktyabrya, 101, Tiraspol, Republic of Moldova, Fax: (+373 533) 8-06-49.· 
      Finagin Vladislav Alexandrovich, Chairperson of the Committee of 
State Security of the PMR, MD-3300, 42 Manoilova str., Tiraspol, 
Republic of Moldova; press@kgb-pmr.com; tel/fax: (373 533) 80490·   
    Zvarich Olga Vladimirovna, Minister of Justice of the PMR, 
MD-3300, 26 Lenina str., Tiraspol, Republic of Moldova; tel:(373 533) 
8-18-18; http://justice.idknet.com/PriemObr.nsf/main!OpenForm·    
   Alexander Deli, Prosecutor of Transnistria, Str. K. Libknekhta, 383, 
Tiraspol, Republic of 
Moldova; http://www.prokuror-pmr.org/index.php/internet-priemnaya·   
    Vladimir Sergeevich Rymar, Chairman of the Supreme Court of the PMR,
 Str. Yunosti 29, MD-3300, Tiraspol, Republic of Moldova; (373-533) 
2-50-06, for on-line petitions: http://vspmr.org/mailform.php; ·    
   Burla Mikhail Porfiryevich, Chairman of the Supreme Soviet of 
the PMR, Str. 25 Oktyabrya, 45, Tiraspol, Republic of Moldova, 
tel/fax (+373) 533 9 44 49; burla57@list.ru; Republic of Moldova: • Mr. Pavel Filip, Prime Minister of Republic of Moldova, Chisinau, Piaţa Marii Adunări Naţionale 1, for on-line petitions: http://www.gov.md/feedbacktxt.php?l=en&idc=439 •
 Mr. Edouard Harunjen, General Prosecutor ad interim, Republic of 
Moldova, Chisinau, str. Banulescu Bodoni 26; tel/fax.: (+37322) 212 032;
 email: procuror@procuratura.md •
 Mr. Mihai Poalelungi, President of the Supreme Court of Justice of 
Moldova, Republic of Moldova, Chisinau, str. Petru Rareş 18, e-mail: info@csj.md, Fax: (+373 22) 22 52 27; •
 Mr. Mihail Cotorobai, People’s Advocate, Ombudsman of Moldova, Sfatul 
Trii street, 16, 2012 Chisinau, Republic of Moldova. Fax: +373 22 22 54 
42, e-mail: cpdom@mdl.net •
 H.E. Mr. Tudor Ulianovschi, Ambassador of the Permanent Mission of the 
Republic of Moldova, 28 Chemin du Petit Saconnex, 1209 Geneva, Fax +4122
 733-91-04, E-mail: mission.moldova@ties.itu.int Russian Federation:· 
       Mr. Mikhail Fedotov, Chairman of the Presidential Council for 
civil society and human rights. 103132, Moskva, Staraya pl., d 8/5, pod 
3, Fax: +7 (495) 20 64 855, e-mail: president-sovet@mail.ru, fedotov_MA@gov.ru ;· 
       Ms. Tatiana Moskalkova, High Commissioner for Human Rights in 
the Russian Federation, Myasnitskaya Ul. 47, 103084, Moscow, Russian 
Federation. Fax: +70 95 207 39 77, e-mail: rusombuds@ropnet.ru ;·   
     H.E. Ambassador Alexey Borodavkin, Permanent Representative, 
Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation to the United Nations in 
Geneva, Avenue de la Paix 15, CH-1211, Geneva 20, Switzerland. Fax : +41
 22 734 40 44, E-mail : mission.russian@vtxnet.ch.
         Ambassador Ivan Soltanovsky, Permanent Representative of the 
Russian Federation to the Council of Europe, 75, allée de la Robertsau, 
67000 Strasbourg, France. Fax : (+33) (0) 3 88 24 19 74. Email : representationpermderussie@wanadoo.frEmbassy of Ukraine to the Republic of Moldova:·       Ambassador Serhii Pyrozhkov, 17, Vasile Lupu Str., Chisinau, 2008, Republic of Moldova. Fax: (00373 22) 582108. Email: emb_md@mfa.gov.ua, ambasua@ukr.netOSCE Mission to Moldova:· 
      Ambassador Micheal Scanlan, Head of Mission, Alexei Mateevici Str.
 75, MD-2009 Chisinau, Moldova. Fax: +373 22 22 34 96. Email : moldova@osce.orgDelegation of the European Union to Moldova:· 
      Pirkka Tapiola Kogalniceanu, Head of Delegation, Street nr 12 MD 
2001 Chisinau, Republic of Moldova Fax: (+373 22) 27 26 22, 
Email: delegation-Moldova@eeas.europa.euCouncil of Europe Office in Moldova:· 
      José Luis Herrero, Head of Office, 63 Vlaicu Pircalab Street 2012 
Chisinau, Republic of Moldova, Fax : +373 22 202 305, Email 
: fieldchisinau@coe.intPlease also write to the embassies of the Republic of Moldova and of the Russian Federation in your respective country.*******Geneva-Brussels, 30 May 2016
Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this
appeal in your reply. 
[1] The PMR is a separatist entity 
that split from the Republic of Moldova in 1990 but that has not been 
recognized by the international community.[2] On 28 March 2016 
Mr. Lypovchenko was condemned for extremism to 3 years 6 months of 
prison and he is now waiting for his appeal to be examined. According to
 the information received, he would have denounced the illegal action of
 “Militia” investigators and expressed his disagreement with the regime 
of Tiraspol. If you want to unsubscribe from this mailing list, please reply to this message and add "unsubscribe" in the "subject" line.Si
 vous voulez vous désinscrire de cette liste de diffusion, répondez 
simplement à cet e-mail et ajoutez "désincription" dans la ligne du 
sujet de l'e-mail.Si usted desea que sea anulada su inscripción a 
esta lista de difusión, por favor simplemente responda a este E-mail y 
agregue la palabra "desinscripción" en el espacio del tema (subject) del
 E-mail. 