Azerbaijan:  Sport For Rights: Joint Statement: Renewed Human Rights Crackdown Ahead of Referendum
August 18, 2016
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Azerbaijan / 2016 / AugustAzerbaijan: Sport For Rights: Joint Statement: Renewed Human Rights Crackdown Ahead of Referendum​​Sport
 for Rights' campaign, of which OMCT is member, has been established to 
raise the problem of political prisoners in the context of the 
forthcoming international sporting events to be hosted by Azerbaijan. 18 August 2016. Less
 than six weeks ahead of a constitutional referendum, the Azerbaijani 
authorities have unleashed a new wave of repression to silence critical 
voices. The undersigned members of the Sport for Rights coalition 
condemn this renewed crackdown, and call on the Azerbaijani authorities 
to take immediate steps to improve the human rights situation in the 
country, starting with the release of political prisoners.On 12 August, prominent Azerbaijani economist and Executive Secretary of the opposition Republican Alternative (REAL) movement Natig Jafarli was
 arrested on charges of illegal entrepreneurship and abuse of power, and
 sentenced to four months of pre-trial detention. On 17 August, the 
Court of Appeals rejected the appeal for his release. According to Sport
 for Rights member the Institute for Reporters’ Freedom and Safety, 
Jafarli has been locked up for his “peaceful criticism” of the country’s
 upcoming constitutional referendum. The charges against Jafarli stem 
from a criminal case the Prosecutor General’s Office launched against 
a group of NGOs in 2014. If convicted, Jafarli may face up to 
eight years of imprisonment.On 13 August, NIDA civic movement activist Elgiz Gahraman
 was arrested, held incommunicado over the weekend, charged on 15 August
 with drug possession, and sentenced to four months’ 
pre-trial detention. Also on 15 August, REAL movement youth activists Elshan Gasimov and Togrul Ismayilov
 were arrested and sentenced to seven days of administrative detention 
each on charges of resisting police. Authorities also harassed 
civic activist and former political prisoner Bakhtiyar Hajiyev, 
calling him in for questioning and then subjecting him to a court 
hearing that dragged out over three days, before fining him 100 AZN on 
charges of “minor hooliganism”.Sport for Rights considers 
the charges against Jafarli, Gahraman, and the other activists to be 
politically motivated, and calls for their immediate and unconditional 
release, along with the release of all of Azerbaijan’s dozens of 
political prisoners - including opposition REAL movement leader Ilgar Mammadov, whose release has been ordered by the European Court of Human Rights; journalist Seymur Hezi; and youth activists Ilkin Rustemzade, Giyas Ibrahimov, and Bayram Mammadov.This
 spate of repression takes place in the aftermath of Azerbaijan’s latest
 mega event, the Formula One European Grand Prix, held in Baku in June. 
It also takes place on the eve of a constitutional referendum set for 26
 September, which will decide a series of problematic amendments aimed 
at further consolidating power in Azerbaijan’s already dominant 
presidency. The Azerbaijani government’s proposal of these amendments 
immediately followed July’s coup attempt in Turkey.Events in 
Turkey have played a further role in Azerbaijan’s renewed crackdown. On 
15 August, the Azerbaijani Prosecutor General’s Office announced it had 
opened a criminal case against supporters of the Turkish Gulen movement 
“to prevent illegal actions on the territory of Azerbaijan”. Detained 
NIDA civic movement activist Elgiz Gahraman was linked to the Gulen 
movement in an article in the pro-governmental press that also targeted 
figures of the opposition Popular Front Party and the satellite 
Azerbaycan Saatı (“Azerbaijan Hour”) programme, signalling possible 
further pressure to come. On 17 August, the Caucasus University in Baku 
announced it had fired 50 Turkish instructors for alleged links with the
 Gulen movement.Broadcast of Azerbaijan Saatı was stopped on 27 
July when Turkish television station Barış TV, which carried 
the programme, was among the media outlets shut down by a presidential 
decree in Turkey, alleging their connection to the Gulen movement. The 
transmission of another rare critical news source on developments in 
Azerbaijan, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty’s programme Azadlıq 
(“Freedom”) A-LIVE, was halted without explanation by Türksat satellite 
on 8 August. In Azerbaijan, private national television station ANS TV 
remains off the air following a court order on 29 July to revoke the 
station’s license in connection with an interview it had planned 
to broadcast with Fethullah Gulen.All of this occurs against 
the backdrop of a dire overall human rights situation in Azerbaijan. The
 media remains completely dominated by the state, and critical 
journalists operate in a climate of fear. Excessive restrictions remain 
on civil society, severely hindering the ability of independent NGOs to 
operate. Travel bans continue to be used against journalists, activists,
 and politicians – including journalists Khadija Ismayilova, whose appeal to lift her travel ban was denied on 15 August, and Elchin Mammad, who was detained when trying to cross the Azerbaijani border on 9 August.The
 Sport for Rights coalition calls for the Azerbaijani authorities to 
immediately cease these gross and systemic violations and take steps to 
improve the human rights situation in the country, starting with the 
immediate and unconditional release of political prisoners held for 
their peaceful political activities or exercise of their right 
to freedom of expression. Sport for Rights further calls for sustained 
attention to Azerbaijan by the international community, and concrete 
action to hold the Azerbaijani government accountable for its human 
rights obligations.Supporting organisations:ARTICLE 19Canadian Journalists for Free ExpressionCivil Rights DefendersFreedom HouseFreedom NowHelsinki Foundation for Human RightsHuman Rights House FoundationIndex on CensorshipInstitute for Reporters’ Freedom and SafetyInternational Federation for Human Rights (FIDH)International Media SupportInternational Partnership for Human RightsNetherlands Helsinki CommitteeNorwegian Helsinki CommitteePEN AmericaPEN InternationalPeople in NeedReporters Without BordersWorld Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) 