Russian Federation:  Prolonged arbitrary detention of environmental rights activist Mr. Evgeny Vitishko
December  2, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2015 / DecemberRussian Federation: Prolonged arbitrary detention of environmental rights activist Mr. Evgeny VitishkoNew informationRUS 001 / 0214 / OBS 014.1Arbitrary detention / Judicial harassmentRussiaDecember 2, 2015The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights
 Defenders, a joint programme of the International Federation for Human 
Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has 
received new information and requests your urgent intervention in the 
following situation in the Russian Federation.New information:The
 Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the prolonged 
arbitrary detention of environmental rights activist Mr. Evgeny Vitishko, member of the Environmental Watch on North Caucasus (EWNC)[1].According
 to the information received, on November 20, 2015, the Tambov Regional 
Prosecutor's office challenged the decision of the Kirsanov Court of the
 Tambor Region, issued on November 10, to commute the sentence of Mr. 
Vitishko into an early conditional release ten days after.The
 Kirsanov Court decision aimed to replace Mr. Vitishko's remaining 
prison term with a more lenient form of punishment, releasing him from 
prison but maintaining restrictions on his freedom of movement, as he 
was set to remain at his place of permanent residence until the end of 
his sentence (scheduled for February 2017).By 
challenging this Court decision, the Prosecutor's office therefore 
prevented Mr. Vitishko's early release just before it was to happen.On
 December 3, 2015, the Court of Appeals will consider the appeal of the 
Prosecutor's office. Mr. Vitishko is set to remain in detention until 
that date.On November 24, 2015, to protest 
against his continuous detention, Mr. Vitishko started a hunger strike, 
and filed an official statement denouncing the Prosecutor's office non 
compliance with Russian Laws on correctional facilities. As Mr. 
Vitishko's lawyer Sergey Loktev confirmed, the Tambor Court's decision 
should have come into force, and his client should have been released on
 November 21. In addition, although Mr. Vitishko announced his hunger 
strike, he was reportedly sent to hard labour and forced to complete 
difficult tasks such as loading and unloading operations, as well as 
harvesting cabbage in snowed fields.The 
Observatory strongly condemns the continuous judicial harassment of Mr. 
Vitishko, and calls on the Russian authorities to immediately and 
unconditionally release him and drop all charges against him as he is 
targeted solely for his legitimate human rights activities.Background information: Mr. Vitishko
 was arrested on February 3, 2014, one day before the Olympic Torch was 
due to arrive in Sochi. The arrest took place while he was going out of 
the building of the Tuapse Criminal Executive Inspection (UFSIN), where 
Mr. Vitishko had to report regularly after his sentencing to a suspended
 term of prison in June 2012. He was also subjected to other travel 
restrictions, such as not being allowed to leave Tuapse District. When 
he reported to UFSIN, Mr. Vitishko informed the authorities that he 
intended to travel to Sochi. Shortly after, Mr. Vitishko was arrested 
for “theft” and then “swearing at a bus stop”. Though no evidence was 
brought in, Mr. Vitishko was sentenced for “hooliganism” the same day to
 15 days in administrative detention. It is believed that these 
trumped-up charges were brought by the police in order to prevent 
Mr. Vitishko from carrying out protest actions in Sochi.On
 February 12, 2014, Judge Andrey Konnov of the Krasnodar Regional Court 
 upheld in appeal the decision of the Tuapse District Court, which, on 
December 20, 2013, had decided to enact a suspended sentence against 
Mr. Evgeny Vitishko. The latter decision stated that the activist had 
violated a curfew imposed on him in connection with his conditional 
three-year prison sentence. The original sentence dates from June 20, 
2012, when the Tuapse District Court sentenced Mr. Vitishko to three 
years in custody with two-year probation for “wilful destruction or 
damage of property” (Article 167 of the Criminal Code of the Russian 
Federation).Mr. Vitishko had attended the 
appeal hearing only through video conference, as on February 12, 2014, 
he was already serving a 15-day administrative detention sentence for 
“hooliganism”.On February 18, 2014, 
Mr. Evgeny Vitishko was transferred to the pre-trial detention facility 
(SIZO) No. 1 of the City of Krasnodar, pending his transfer to a penal 
colony to serve his three-year prison sentence.Actions requested:Please write to the authorities of the Russian Federation, urging them to:i.
 Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity
 of Mr. Evgeny Vitishko as well as of all human rights defenders in the 
Russian Federation;ii. Immediately and unconditionally release Mr. Evgeny Vitishko and drop all charges against him;iii.
 Put an end to any act of harassment, including at the judicial level, 
against Mr. Evgeny Vitishko, as well as against all human rights 
defenders in the Russian Federation,iv. Comply
 with the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights 
Defenders, adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998, 
especially:- its Article 1, which states that “everyone has 
the right, individually and in association with others, to promote and 
to strive for the protection and realisation of human rights and 
fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels”,- 
 its Article 5, which provides that “everyone has the right, 
individually and in association with others, at the national and 
international levels (a) to meet or assemble peacefully”;- 
and Article 12.2, which provides that “the State shall take all 
necessary measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities
 of everyone, individually and in association with others, against any 
violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse 
discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence 
of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the 
present Declaration”;v. Comply with the provisions of the Declaration of the Committee of Ministers of the Councilof Europe on the protection of human rights defenders and the promotion of their activities,and in particular With Article 2.i), in which the Committee calls on member States to “createan
 environment conducive to the work of human rights defenders, enabling 
individuals, groups and associations to freely carry out activities, on a
 legal basis, consistent with international standards, to promote and 
strive for the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms 
without any restrictions other than those authorised by the EuropeanConvention on Human Rights;vi.
 More generally, ensure in all circumstances the respect for human 
rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights and with international and regional human 
rights instruments ratified by the Russian Federation.Addresses:Mr. Vladimir
 Putin, President of the Russian Federation, Ilinka Str, 23, Moscow, 
103132, Moscow, Russian Federation. Faxes : + 7 495 606 5173+ 7 495 606 5173 / 630 2408Mr. Yurii
 Ya. Chaika, Prosecutor General, 15 A, Bolshaia Dmitrovka 125993 Moscow,
 Russian Federation. Fax : +7 495 692 17 25, Email : prgenproc@gov.ruMr. Vladimir
 Kolokoltsev, Minister of the Interior, Ulitsa Zhitnaya, 16, 117049 
Moscow, Russian Federation. Fax : + 7 495 637 49 25Mr. Alexander
 Konovalov, Minister of Justice, 14, ul. Zhitnaya, 119991 Moscow, 
Russian Federation. Fax : +7 495 955 59 99. Electronic appeals via 
website : http://minjust.ru/electronic-appeal/emailMr. Sergey
 Lavrov, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Smolenskaya-Sennaya pl, 32/34, 
121200 Moscow, Russian Federation. Fax : + 7 495 644 2203Ms. Ella Pamfilova, Ombudsman of the Russian Federation. E-mail: press-sl@ropnet.ruMr. Mikhail
 Fedotov, Head of the Council under the President for development of 
civil society and human rights. Fax : +7 495 606-48-55. E-mail: president-sovet@mail.ru, fedotov_MA@gov.ruH.E.
 Mr. Alexey Borodavkin, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of the Russian 
Federation to the United Nations in Geneva, Avenue de la Paix 15, 
CH-1211, Geneva 20, Switzerland. Fax : +41 22 734 40 44, E-mail : mission.russian@vtxnet.chAmbassador
 Alexander Romanov, Embassy of the Russian Federation in Brussels, 66, 
avenue de Fre, Brussels, 1180 Brussels, Belgium. Fax : +32 2 374 26 13. 
E-mail : amrusbel@skynet.beAmbassador Alexander 
Alekseev, Permanent Representation of the Russian Federation to the 
Council of Europe, 75, allee de la Robertsau, 67000 Strasbourg, France. 
Fax : (+33) (0) 3 88 24 19 74. Email : representationpermderussie@wanadoo.frPlease also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of the Russian Federation in your respective country.*** Paris-Geneva, December 2, 2015Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.The
 Observatory, a FIDH and OMCT venture, is dedicated to the protection of
 Human Rights Defenders and aims to offer them concrete support in their
 time of need.To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.orgTel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80+33 1 43 55 18 80 FREETel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29+ 41 22 809 49 29[1]    
 EWNC is an independent group that published a report on environmental 
damage caused by preparations for the 2014 Winter Olympic Games in 
Sochi. For years, the group has led protests and repeatedly spoke out 
publicly on these issues. Mr. Vitishko as well as other EWNC members 
have been previously subjected to threats and harassment due to their 
human rights work.CallSend SMSCall from mobileAdd to SkypeYou'll need Skype CreditFree via Skype 