Egypt:  Arbitrary detention of activist Ms. Amal Fathy
May 12, 2018
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Egypt / 2018 / MayEgypt: Arbitrary detention of activist Ms. Amal FathyEGY 002 / 0518 / OBS 059Arbitrary detention /Judicial harassmentEgyptMay 12, 2018The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a partnership of the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT) and FIDH, requests your urgent intervention in the following situation in  Egypt.Brief description of the situation:The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the arbitrary detention of activist Ms. Amal Fathy for
 posting a video on social media criticising the Government’s failure to
 protect women against sexual harassment. Ms. Fathy is known for being 
vocal against human rights violations in Egypt, in particular the 
arbitrary detention of activists.According
 to the information received, on May 11, 2018, at around 2.30 am, 
Egyptian security forces broke into the house in Cairo of Ms. Amal Fathy
 and her husband Mr. Mohamed Lotfy, Executive Director 
of the Egyptian Commission for Rights and Freedoms (ECRF), and started 
searching the house. Their mobile phones were seized and they were 
denied the right to communicate with a lawyer or their relatives.The
 two activists were brought to Maadi police station, in the south of 
Cairo, along with their three-year-old son. Around three hours later, 
Mr. Lotfy and his son were released. A prosecutor subsequently placed 
Ms. Amal Fathy under preventive detention for 15 days. She was accused 
of diffusing a video and photos harming national security and misusing 
the Internet.On
 May 9, 2018, Ms. Amal Fathy posted a 12-minute video on Facebook 
criticising the Egyptian Government for failing to protect women against
 sexual harassment as well as over a general deterioration in living 
conditions in the country.Over
 the next day, pro-government and State-owned media outlets released 
articles citing the video, identifying Ms. Fathy as an April 6 movement 
activist and the wife of Mohamed Lotfy and accusing her of insulting 
Egypt and Egyptian institutions. This was followed by a wave of 
harassment on social media along with threats against Ms. Fathy.The
 Observatory strongly condemns the arbitrary detention of Ms. Amal 
Fathy, which merely aims at punishing her for her peaceful and 
legitimate human rights activities as well as those of her husband. The 
Observatory recalls that this is not the first time that ECRF and its 
members are subjected to harassment, due to their documentation of cases
 of torture in prisons, enforced disappearances as well as their legal 
support in  Giulio Regeni’s case [1].The
 Observatory urges the Egyptian authorities to release Ms. Amal 
Fathy immediately and unconditionally and to put an end to all forms of 
harassment against her, including at the judicial level.Actions requested:Please write to the authorities of Egypt asking them to:i.      
 Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological integrity
 of Ms. Amal Fathy, Mr. Mohamed Lotfy, their relatives and all human 
rights defenders in Egypt;ii.
     Immediately and unconditionally release Ms. Amal Fathy as well as 
all detained human rights defenders in Egypt, as her detention is 
arbitrary and it is merely aimed at punishing her for her human rights 
activities;iii.
    Put an end to all acts of harassment, including at the judicial 
level, against Ms. Amal Fathyas well as against Mr. Mohamed Lotfy and 
all human rights defenders in Egypt, and ensure that they are able to 
carry out their activities without hindrance; iv.
    In the meantime, ensure that all judicial proceedings brought against
 Ms. Amal Fathy are conducted in accordance with the right to a fair 
trial; v.
    Conform with the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights 
Defenders, adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on 
December 9, 1998, especially Articles 1, 6(c) and 12.2; andvi.
    More generally, ensure in all circumstances the respect for human 
rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights and with international and regional human 
rights instruments ratified by Egypt.Addresses:·     President of the Arab Republic of Egypt, H.E. Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, Fax: +202 2391 1441. Email:p.spokesman@op.gov.eg, Twitter: @AlsisiOfficial·     Prime Minister, Mr. Sherif Ismail. Fax: + 202 2735 6449 / 27958016. ·     Minister of the Interior, Mr. Magdi Abdel-Ghaffar, Fax: +202 2579 2031 / 2794 5529·     Minister of Justice, Mohamed Hossam Abdel-Rahim, Fax: +202 2795 8103  ·     Minister of Social Solidarity, Ghada Waly, Fax: +202 3337 5390·     Public Prosecutor, Counsellor Nabeel Sadek, Fax: +202 2577 4716·     Mr. Mohamed Fayeq, President of the National Council For Human Rights, Fax: + 202 25747497 / 25747670. Email:  nchr@nchr.org.eg·     H.E.
 Mr. Amr Ramadan, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of Egypt to the United 
Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, Email: mission.egypt@ties.itu.int, Fax: 
+41 22 738 44 15·     Embassy of Egypt in Brussels, Belgium, Fax: +32 2 675.58.88; Email: embassy.egypt@skynet.bePlease also write to the diplomatic missions or embassies of Egypt in your respective country. ***Geneva-Paris, May 12, 2018Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.The
 Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (the 
Observatory) was created in 1997 by the World Organisation Against 
Torture (OMCT) and FIDH. The objective of this programme is to intervene
 to prevent or remedy situations of repression against human rights 
defenders. FIDH and OMCT are both members of  ProtectDefenders.eu, the European Union Human Rights Defenders Mechanism implemented by international civil society.To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:·             E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org·             Tel and fax OMCT + 41 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29·             Tel and fax FIDH + 33 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80[1]See  Observatory Urgent Appeal EGY 004 / 0917 / OBS 105, published on September 27, 2017. 