Russian Federation:  End of proceedings against Ms. Sapiyat Magomedova / Ongoing impunity
March 26, 2012
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Urgent Interventions / Russian Federation / 2012 / MarchRussian Federation: End of proceedings against Ms. Sapiyat Magomedova / Ongoing impunity​New information

RUS 003 / 0312 / OBS 027End of judicial harassment / Impunity

Russian Federation

March 26, 2012
The Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, a 
joint programme of the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) 
and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT), has received new 
information and requests your urgent intervention in the following 
situation in the Russian Federation.

New information:

The Observatory has been informed by reliable sources about the closure of criminal proceedings against Ms. Sapiyat Magomedova,
 a lawyer at the firm “Omarov A.S. and Partners”, a law-firm known for 
taking on cases related to human rights violations, such as torture, 
extra-judicial killings and abductions, in Khasavyurt City, Republic of 
Dagestan, in the Russian Federation.

According to the information received, on March 14, 2012, Ms. 
Magomedova received a letter from the Public Prosecutor’s Office, 
informing her of the closure of criminal proceedings against both 
herself and two of the police officers who had assaulted her on June 17,
 2010 (see background information).

The Observatory recalls that on July 2, 2010, Ms. Magomedova was 
charged for “assault and battery of authority representative” (Article 
319 of the Criminal Code), while two special militia agents (OMON) in 
the Interior Department (GOVD), Mr. Batirb Magliev and Mr. Nariman 
Mollaev, were charged on July 1, 2010 of “abuse of power” (Sub-point 
(a), Part 3 of Article 286 of the Criminal Code).

Over the past months, Ms. Magomedova had contacted the Prosecutor 
several times to request information on the development of the case, but
 she had never received a response.

It is only while Ms. Magomedova was in the investigation division of
 the criminal department of the Russian Republic of Dagestan on March 
12, 2012 that she was told, by chance, that criminal proceedings against
 her had been closed three months before. Thus, on March 14, 2012, she 
sent a written request to the Public Prosecutor’s Office to confirm the 
closure. She received the confirmation on the same day stating that “the
 evidence collected regarding the case concerning Magomedova and the 
police officers are contradictory, and this contradiction is 
unremovable, because no objective data has been produced to establish 
the truth about this incident and to disclose the actions of each 
participant, and all opportunities to collect additional evidence were 
exhausted”. The case was closed by the Public Prosecutor on December 28,
 2011, without Ms. Magomedova being informed.

Ms. Magomedova intends to lodge an appeal against the Public 
Prosecutor’s decision to discharge the two police officers who assaulted
 her and to request that charges be levied against the two other agents 
who attacked her, against whom no charges have laid down so far.

The Observatory welcomes the closure of the criminal proceedings 
against Ms. Magomedova. However, the Observatory is concerned by the 
discontinuation of the charges against the police officers, in that it 
leaves human rights violations committed by police officers in impunity.

Background situation [1]:

In the afternoon of June 17, 2010, Ms. Sapiyat Magomedova, who was 
visiting a client, was beaten by four GOVD OMON agents of Khasavyurt 
city, and lost consciousness as a result.

Ms. Magomedova had come to the GOVD premises with all the 
documentation required to visit her client, Ms. Malika Evtomirovoya, who
 had been violently arrested and detained earlier the same day. Ms. 
Evtomirovoya had lodged a complaint in the past against a police officer
 for abuses sustained by the latter, and had been indirectly warned by 
the investigator in charge of the case not to be too vocal about that 
case otherwise she would be arrested. The arrest intervened just after 
the investigation was handed out to another investigator, upon request 
of Ms. Magomedova.

At the GOVD, Investigator Zakir Stambuloff rejected Ms. Magomedova’s
 request to visit her client, called the police patrol, and ordered the 
agents to “throw her out of here”. As Ms. Magomedova insisted to have 
access to her client, agents started to severely beat her, until militia
 chief Shamil Kerimovich Temigereev shouted to “throw that bitch”. Ms. 
Magomedova was then taken to the office of an investigator, and lost 
consciousness on three occasions there. A man reportedly advised police 
officers to draft a report stating that it was Ms. Magomedova who had 
started to attack them.

The Observatory was also informed that an ambulance was reportedly 
prevented from accessing Ms. Magomedova until she was dragged in a state
 of unconsciousness to the security checkpoint at the entrance of the 
building. The ambulance then managed to take her to the Khasavyurt city 
hospital.

In the assault, Ms. Magomedova’s gold chain was reportedly stolen, 
her mobile phone broken, and her lawyer’s card torn. She only regained 
consciousness in the evening at the hospital, and a forensic medical 
expert refused to examine her.

On June 19, 2010, Ms. Magomedova was transferred to the Republic’s clinical hospital in Makhachkala.

On July 1, 2010, an investigation was opened against the four police
 officers for “abuse of power”. Yet, on July 2, 2010, a criminal case 
against Ms. Magomedova was initiated for “assault and battery of 
authority representative”. On November 29, 2010, she lodged a complaint 
for the failure by the Russian police to investigate the attack under 
Article 25 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.

In November 2011, the City Court of Khasaviurt remanded the two cases before the Public Prosecutor.

In the past, Ms. Magomedova filed four complaints before the 
European Court of Human Rights against investigators of the Prosecutor’s
 Office of Khasavyurt, accused of abuses against individuals. She has 
also been subjected to various acts of judicial harassment over the past
 years.

Actions requested:

Please write to the authorities of the Russian Republic of Dagestan and ask them to:

i. Guarantee in all circumstances the physical and psychological 
integrity of Ms. Magomedova as well as of all human rights defenders in 
Dagestan, and in the Russian Federation as a whole;

ii. Carry out immediately a, thorough, effective and impartial 
investigation into the above-mentioned facts, the result of which must 
be made public, in order to identify those responsible, bring them 
before a civil, competent and impartial tribunal and apply to them the 
penal sanctions provided by the law;

iii. Put an end to all acts of harassment - including at the 
judicial level - against Ms. Magomedova as well as against all human 
rights defenders in Dagestan, and in the Russian Federation as a whole;

iv. Comply with the provisions of the United Nations Declaration on 
Human Rights Defenders, adopted by the UN General Assembly on December 
9, 1998, especially:

 its
 Article 1, which states that “everyone has the right, individually and 
in association with others, to promote and to strive for the protection 
and realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms at the national
 and international levels”,

 and
 Article 12.2, which provides that “the State shall take all necessary 
measures to ensure the protection by the competent authorities of 
everyone, individually and in association with others, against any 
violence, threats, retaliation, de facto or de jure adverse 
discrimination, pressure or any other arbitrary action as a consequence 
of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights referred to in the 
present Declaration”;

v. Conform in any circumstances with OP 2(iv.) of the Council of Europe Declaration on Human Rights Defenders [2], stating that member-States shall “take effective measures to prevent attacks on or harassment of human rights defenders”;

vi. Ensure in all circumstances respect for human rights and 
fundamental freedoms in accordance with international human rights 
standards and international instruments ratified by the Russian 
Federation.

Addresses:

·  Mr. Dmitri Medvedev, President of the Russian Federation, Ilinka 
Str, 23, Moscow, 103132, Moscow, Russian Federation, Faxes:+ 7 495 606 
5173 / 630 2408

·  Mr. Yuriy Chaika, General Public Prosecutor of Russian 
Federation, 125993, Moscow, GSP-3, 15a B. Dimitrovka str. Russian 
Federation, Fax: +7 495 692-96-00 / +7 495 692 1725

·  Chairwoman of the Council on the Development of Institutes of 
Civil Society and Human Rights under the President of the Russian 
Federation, Ms. Ella Pamfilova, 103132 g. Moskva, Staraya ploshchad, d 
8/5,pod 3, Russian Federation, Fax:+74956064855

·  Mr. Vladimir Lukin, Russian Federal Ombudsman for Human Rights, Fax: +7 495 207 3969 / +7 495 607-53-37

·  Minister of Internal Affairs, Mr. Rashid Nurgaliev, ul. Zhitnaya,
 16, 117049 Moscow, Russian Federation, Telegram: Rossiia, 117049, 
Moskva, Fax: + 7 495 637 49 25

·  Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mr. Sergey Lavrov, 
Smolenskaya-Sennaya pl, 32/34, 121200 Moscow, Russian Federation, 
Telegram: Fax:+ 7 495 644 2203

·  Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation to the United Nations
 in Geneva Av. de la Paix 15, CH-1211, Geneva 20, Switzerland, e-mail : 
mission.russian@ties.itu.int, Fax: +4122 734 40 44

·  Embassy of the Russian Federation in Brussels, 31-33 boulevard du Régent, 1000 Brussels, Belgium, Fax: + 32 2 513 76 49.

Please also write to the diplomatic mission or embassy of the Russian Federation in your respective country.

***

Paris-Geneva, March 26, 2012

Kindly inform us of any action undertaken quoting the code of this appeal in your reply.

To contact the Observatory, call the emergency line:

·  E-mail: Appeals@fidh-omct.org

·  Tel and fax FIDH + 33 (0) 1 43 55 25 18 / +33 1 43 55 18 80

·  Tel and fax OMCT + 41 (0) 22 809 49 39 / + 41 22 809 49 29Footnotes[1] See Observatory Annual Report 2011.
[2]
 Declaration of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe for 
enhanced protection of human rights defenders, adopted on February 6, 
2008. 