China:  Joint Open Letter: The recent arrest of a large group of human rights lawyers in China
July 21, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / China / 2015 / JulyChina: Joint Open Letter: The recent arrest of a large group of human rights lawyers in ChinaHis Excellency Mr Xi Jinping, The PresidentThe State Council General Office2 FuyoujieXichengquBeijingshi 100017People's Republic of ChinaHis Excellency Mr. Guo ShengkunMinister of Public SecurityNo.14, Donchang’anjie,Dongchengqu, Beijing 100741People’s Republic of ChinaEmail:  gabzfwz@mps.gov.cnDate: 21 July 2015Your Excellency,Re: The recent arrest of a large group of human rights lawyers in ChinaThe
 undersigned organisations strongly condemn the recent unprecedented and
 seemingly well-coordinated detention of a large number of human rights 
lawyers in China. It  followed the disappearance  of Lawyer Wang Yu on 9
 July 2015 and included inter alia:•         
 the criminal detention of lawyers and legal assistants Wang Yu (王宇), 
Zhou Shifeng (周世鋒), Wang Quanzhang (王全璋), Huang Liqun (黃力群), Sui Muqing 
(隋牧青)and Xie Yang (谢阳), Bao Longjun (包龍軍), Liu Sixin (劉四新), Ge Ping (戈平)
 and Li Heping (李和平);•          
searching of the offices of Fengrui Law Firm (锋锐) and of Xiyuanwang 
(洗冤网), a network set up to work on wrongful criminal conviction cases, 
in Beijing.As of 19 July 2015, a total of  at least 233 lawyers,  law firm staff, and human rights defenders have been detained, arrested, held incommunicado, summoned, or otherwise had their freedom temporarily restricted.Many
 of those detained were part of a group of over 100 lawyers and rights 
activists who signed a public statement on 9 July 2015 condemning Wang 
Yu’s disappearance.Furthermore we have noted 
that official media reports have pro-actively portrayed a number of 
detained ‘suspects’ as criminals, including a recent CCTV 13 news report
 describing recent human rights lawyer advocacy campaigns as 
‘rights-defence-style trouble-making’ (‘维权式’滋事).These
 events make it impossible to take President's Xi Jinping’s recent 
claims to be promoting the rule of law seriously, as they rigorously 
violate many international standards, including but not limited to: the 
UN Basic Principles on the Role of Lawyers, the International Covenant 
on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), the Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights, the Declaration on the Right and Responsibility of 
Individuals, Groups and Organs of Society to Promote and Protect 
Universally Recognized Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (UN 
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders), and the UN Body of principles 
for the protection of all persons under any form of detention or 
imprisonment.All these lawyers, law 
firm staff and human rights defenders who have been arbitrarily deprived
 of their liberty should be immediately released. If they are not 
immediately released, we urgently request that you immediately confirm 
the whereabouts of those currently in detention and that you ensure that
 they have prompt and regular access to their lawyers and family.Furthermore
 we request that those arrested will be protected from any future 
control measures typically used against human rights lawyers in China 
such as: tracking and following; violent attacks; soft detention; ‘being
 travelled’;  being asked to have ‘chats’; being placed under criminal, 
administrative, or judicial detention; being subjected to enforced 
disappearance, torture or psychiatric incarceration.We
 request your urgent attention for this matter and will continue to 
closely monitor the fate of the lawyers concerned in the near future.Yours sincerely, Lawyers for Lawyers  Lawyers’ Rights Watch Canada  The Law Society of England and Wales  International Commission of Jurists  Rechters voor Rechters  Day of the Endangered Lawyer  Ordre des Avocats de Genève  European Criminal Bar Association  Amsterdamse Orde van Advocaten  Sollicitors’ International Human Rights Group  Syndicat des Avocats de France  Association of Libertarian Jurists  The Law Society of Upper Canada  International Federation For Human Rights, in the framework of its Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders  World Organisation Against Torture, in the framework of its Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders  Deutscher Anwalt Verein  Freedom House  European Democratic Lawyers  European Lawyers Promoting Law and Justice  Fisher Jones Greenwood Solicitors  Gillis Long Poverty Law Center  Bar Human Rights Committee of England and Wales  Bar Council of Ireland Human Rights Committee  International Service for Human Rights  Asociación Libre de AbogadosEncl: Chinese translation of this letter: China_2015.07.21_Joint_OL_ChineseC.C:   His Excellency Mr Xu CHEN          Ambassador of the People's Republic of China in the Kingdom of the Netherlands         Willem Lodewijklaan 10     
  2517 JT The Hague, The Netherlands                        
                                                                           Email: chinaemb_nl@mfa.gov.cnC.C:    His Excellency Mr. Aart Jacobi          Ambassador of  the Kingdom of the Netherlands  in Beijing          4 Liangmahe South Rd.          Chaoyang district          100600 Beijing,  People’s Republic of China                                                                                  Email: pek@minbuza.nlC.C:   His Excellency Ambassador Wu Hailong          Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of China to the United Nations in Geneva          11, chemin de Surville 1213 Petit-Lancy,          Geneva, Switzerland          Email: chinamission_gva@mfa.gov.cnC.C:    Mr. Wang Junfeng          All China Lawyers Association          5/F., Qinglan Plaza          No. 24, Dongsishitiao,          Dongchengqu, Beijing 100007,  People’s Republic of ChinaC.C:   Mr. David Kaye      Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression         Palais des Nations         CH-1211 Geneva 10, Switzerland         Email: freedex@ohchr.orgC.C:   Mr Michel Forst         Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights defenders         Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights – Palais Wilson         United Nations Office at Geneva         CH 1211 Geneva 10, Switzerland         Email: defenders@ohchr.orgC.C:   Ms. Mónica PintoSpecial Rapporteur on the Independence of Judges and LawyersOffice of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human RightsUnited Nations Office at Geneva8-14 Avenue de la Paix 1211Geneva 10, SwitzerlandE-mail: SRindependenceJL@ohchr.orgC.C:  Mr. Bert Koenders                   Minister of Foreign Affairs                                        Dutch Ministry of Foreign Affairs         Bezuidenhoutseweg 67      2594 AC The Hague, The Netherlands         Email: bert.koenders@minbuza.nlC.C:  Mr. Kees van Baar         Human  Right  Ambassador with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs         Dutch Ministry of Foreign Affairs         Bezuidenhoutseweg 67         2594 AC The Hague, The Netherlands         Email: kees-van.baar@minbuza.nl 