Thailand:  Joint Open Letter: Drop Charges against Phuketwan Journalists Alan Morison and Chutima Sidasathian
July  9, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionHuman rights defenders / Statements / Thailand / 2015 / JulyThailand: Joint Open Letter: Drop Charges against Phuketwan Journalists Alan Morison and Chutima SidasathianThailand_2015-07.09_Joint_Open_Letter_English4 pages / 192 KB​July 9, 2015Gen. Prayuth Chan-ochaPrime MinisterRoyal Thai GovernmentBangkok, ThailandRE: Drop Charges against Phuketwan Journalists Alan Morison and Chutima SidasathianDear Prime Minister Prayuth Chan-ocha,We
 write to you as international and regional organizations working to 
protect the rights to freedom of expression and freedom of the media to 
raise serious concerns about the Royal Thai Government’s decision to 
seek the prosecution of Phuketwan editor Alan Morison and reporter 
Chutima Sidasathian for criminal libel and for violating the Computer 
Crime Act (CCA). We urge the government to immediately and 
unconditionally withdraw the criminal libel complaint and to have the 
CCA charges dropped. Proceeding with the trial of these two journalists,
 slated to start on July 14, 2015, would be in violation of Thailand’s 
commitments under international law.The 
complaint by the Royal Thai Navy focuses on Phuketwan’s website posting 
from July 17, 2013, concerning the smuggling of Rohingya, an ethnic 
minority group in Myanmar facing systemic discrimination and violence. 
Phuketwan’s post reproduced one paragraph from an article (“Special 
Report: Thai authorities implicated in Rohingya Muslim smuggling 
network”) by another media organization, Reuters, which has not been 
contested by the Navy.The use of criminal 
defamation is an unnecessarily heavy-handed response to any concerns the
 Navy may have with the article and contrary to free expression rights. 
Rather than prosecuting the Phuketwan journalists, the Thai government 
should withdraw these charges and adopt an alternative rights-respecting
 approach to address its concerns with Phuketwan. Such alternative could
 see the Navy instead seek a dialogue with Phuketwan, or request an 
opportunity to publish the Navy’s account of the matter, or issue a 
statement to rebut or clarify the allegations made. We believe it is not
 too late for the Thai government to undertake such an alternative to 
criminal prosecution, which would demonstrate respect for fundamental 
rights on a matter of concern to many foreign governments.Thailand’s
 prosecution of the Phuketwan journalists would violate its obligations 
under article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political 
Rights (ICCPR), which provides that “everyone shall have the right to 
freedom of expression; this right shall include the freedom to seek, 
receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds.”Permissible
 restrictions on the right to freedom of expression do not pertain in 
this case. Any restrictions on the right to freedom of expression must 
meet a strict three part test: they must be provided for by law; must be
 done for the purpose of protecting only specified public interests: 
national security, public order, or public health or morals, or the 
rights or reputations of others; and must be proportionate as well as 
demonstrably and strictly necessary to meet those interests (i.e. being 
the least restrictive measure to achieve the specified purpose).The
 United Nations Human Rights Committee, which monitors state compliance 
with the ICCPR, in General Comment No. 34, paragraph 35, states that 
“when a State party invokes a legitimate ground for restriction of 
freedom of expression, it must demonstrate in specific and 
individualized fashion the precise nature of the threat, and the 
necessity and proportionality of the specific action taken, in 
particular by establishing a direct and immediate connection between the
 expression and the threat.” Yet neither the Thai Navy nor the Thai 
government has done this, nor explained why other actions short of the 
legal action initiated against the two journalists at Phuketwan would 
suffice to meet their concerns.Furthermore,
 paragraph 42 of General Comment No. 34 notes that “The penalization of a
 media outlet, publishers or journalist solely for being critical of the
 government or the political social system espoused by the government 
can never be considered to be a necessary restriction of freedom of 
expression.” Finally, in paragraph 47 of General Comment No. 34, the 
Human Rights Committee calls on states to decriminalize defamation and 
libel and has stressed that such laws must never be used to stifle 
freedom of expression.Our organizations, 
along with an increasing number of governments, concur with the UN Human
 Rights Committee that criminal defamation laws should be abolished 
because criminal penalties infringe on free expression and are always 
disproportionate punishments for reputational harm. Criminal defamation 
laws are open to easy abuse, resulting in very harsh consequences, 
including imprisonment. As repeal of criminal defamation laws in an 
increasing number of countries shows, such laws are not necessary for 
the purpose of protecting reputations. The Johannesburg Principles on 
National Security, Freedom of Expression and Access to Information, an 
influential set of principles issued in 1996 by international legal 
experts, state that “No one may be punished for criticizing or insulting
 … public officials, … unless the criticism or insult was intended and 
likely to incite imminent violence.”Further,
 by continuing on this course, the Thai government is acting contrary to
 its own policy enunciated in the government’s national report to the 
Universal Periodic Review (UPR) process of the UN Human Rights Council 
on October 5, 2011. The Thai government’s presentation stated that:    
 The right to freedom of opinion and expression is the bedrock of 
Thailand’s democratic society. The Constitution guarantees      freedom 
of a person to express opinions, make speeches, write, print and 
publicize; prohibits the closure, interference or           censorship 
of a newspaper or other mass media; and bans politicians from owning 
media outlets. Thailand also plays host to      numerous international 
press agencies, civil society organizations and international NGOs, all 
of which attest to the free           atmosphere that is conducive to news reporting and the free flow of information.Put
 simply, by taking legal action against Phuketwan, the Thai government 
is threatening precisely the rights that the government itself described
 as the “bedrock of Thailand’s democratic society.”The
 use of the Computer Crime Act in this case is also particularly 
troubling, especially since this appears to be the first time that one 
of the services of the Thai armed forces has ever used the CCA against 
journalists. Our organizations urge that this draconian, rights-abusing 
law should be repealed or amended to comply with international law and 
standards instead of being used as a tool to silence journalists writing
 for newspapers, blogs, or other media. We are concerned that article 
14(1) of the CCA under which the Phuketwan journalists are charged is 
vaguely worded and overly broad, and is clearly being used by the 
government in this case to suppress media freedom and silence the voice 
of Phuketwan.Alan Morison and Chutima 
Sidasathian have been unfairly charged with serious offenses for simply 
doing their jobs in a system that authorities claim is committed to 
respecting freedom of expression and the media. Their actions should not
 constitute a crime. We sincerely hope that you will recognize this and 
request an immediate withdrawal of all criminal complaints and charges 
against the Phuketwan journalists, seeking an end to the prosecution.We look forward to hearing from you on this important matter.Sincerely,Brad AdamsAsia DirectorHuman Rights WatchEvelyn Balais-SerranoExecutive DirectorAsia Forum for Human Rights and Development (Forum Asia)Richard BennettDirector, Asia-PacificAmnesty InternationalKarim LahidjiPresidentInternational Federation for Human Rights (FIDH)Edgardo LegaspiExecutive DirectorSoutheast Asian Press Alliance (SEAPA)Charles SantiagoChairpersonASEAN Parliamentarians for Human RightsIan SeidermanLegal and Policy DirectorInternational Commission of JuristsGerald StaberockSecretary GeneralWorld Organization Against Torture (OMCT) 