Kazakhstan: Justice must prevail for torture victim Rasim Bayramov
January 28, 2015
Save as PDF Print versionStatements / 2015 / JanuaryKazakhstan: Justice must prevail for torture victim Rasim Bayramov Kazakhstan: Justice must prevail for torture victim Rasim Bayramov(28 January 2015)
 In December 2014, Kostanay City Court ordered the Department of 
Internal Affairs of Kostanay region to pay compensation to Rasim 
Bayramov for torturing him in 2008. Police and procuracy did not accept 
the ruling and Kostanay Regional Court will consider the police appeal 
on 5 February 2015.1 Rasim Bayramov has struggled for 
justice for years. When domestic complaint mechanisms proved 
ineffective, he turned to the United Nations Committee against Torture, 
with the support of the Kazakhstan International Bureau for Human Rights
 and Rule of Law (KIBHR) and the Open Society Justice Initiative. On 14 
May 2014, the UN Committee ruled under its Individual complaints 
procedure that Rasim Bayramov’s treatment at the hands of police 
amounted to torture and that Kazakhstan should “conduct a proper, 
impartial and independent investigation in order to bring to justice 
those responsible for the complainant’s treatment (and) provide (Rasim 
Bayramov) with full and adequate reparation, including compensation and 
rehabilitation, and to prevent similar violations in the future.”In
 July 2014, the Special Prosecutors Directorate of Kostanay Regional 
Prosecutor’s Office instigated a criminal case under Article 347-1 of 
the Criminal Code of Kazakhstan2 in relation to police abuse 
Rasim Bayramov was subjected to. However, on 10 December the Regional 
Prosecutor’s Office decided to close the criminal case and Rasim 
Bayramov’s lawyer is currently preparing a complaint against the 
decision.In September 2014, KIBHR filed a civil compensation 
claim on Rasim Bayramov’s behalf relating to the torture he was 
subjected to and on 12 December Kostanay City Court ordered the 
Department of Internal Affairs of Kostanay region to pay him damages 
amounting to 100,000 Tenge (approx. 470 EUR).The organizations 
mentioned below believe that the December 2014 Kostanay City Court 
ruling on awarding Rasim Bayramov financial compensation – although the 
court granted a comparatively low amount -- is an important milestone 
toward providing remedies to torture victims in Kazakhstan and should be
 implemented. In its ruling the Court rightly stressed that Kazakhstan 
is obliged to implement principles contained in international human 
rights treaties it has ratified as well as rulings on individual cases 
issued by international human rights bodies.Back in 2008, police
 officers of the city of Rudny in Kostanay region detained Rasim 
Bayramov following witness statements accusing him of having stolen some
 money and three bottles of beer from a local store. Police held him at 
the local police station without access to a lawyer and tortured and 
ill-treated him to extract a confession for two and a half days. Rasim 
Bayramov later recounted that police officers kicked and beat him all 
over his body, pushed him off a chair, dragged him along the corridor by
 his hair, and threatened him with sexual violence if he did not 
confess; they deprived him of sleep at night and gave him nothing to eat
 or drink for over two days. When he lost consciousness, police poured 
water on him and continued torturing him. Eventually, they forced him 
into signing a confession. Although Rasim Bayramov and his mother 
repeatedly complained about the torture and procedural violations to the
 Department of Internal Affairs and the Prosecutor’s Office, no 
effective investigation was opened into the allegations. During the 
trial Rasim Bayramov told the judge about police torture and retracted 
his confession, but Rudny City Court ignored the allegations and 
sentenced Rasim to five years’ imprisonment based on evidence including 
the forced confession. Rasim Bayramov served his sentence until May 
2011, when he was released early for health reasons.Background information:Kazakhstan
 is a party to the UN International Covenant on Civil and Political 
Rights and the UN Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
 Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Convention against Torture), thus 
committing itself to prevent acts of torture and other forms of ill- 
treatment. In 2008, Kazakhstan authorized the Committee against Torture 
to consider complaints under its Individual complaints procedure and, by
 doing so, provided people in Kazakhstan with the opportunity to submit 
complaints to the Committee when their rights under the Convention 
against Torture have been violated by Kazakhstan and when all domestic 
remedies have been exhausted. The same year Kazakhstan ratified the 
Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture, which obliges 
states to set up a National Preventive Mechanism (NPM) to provide 
independent inspection of detention facilties, an important safeguard 
against torture.In recent years Kazakhstan has made some 
progress towards implementing its international human rights 
obligations. For example, Kazakhstan increased the maximum punishment 
for torture and abolished the statute of limitations applicable to the 
offence of torture in its new Criminal Code that came into force in 
January 2015. The new Criminal Code also excludes those convicted of 
torture from benefitting from amnesties. In 2013, Kazakhstan set up an 
NPM and in 2014 NPM members started visiting “closed detention 
facilities”.In 2013, Kostanay City Court already made a decision
 on awarding compensation to a torture victim (Alexander Gerasimov) 
following the first decision made by the UN Committee against Torture in
 relation to an individual case from Kazakhstan. Like Rasim Bayramov, 
Alexander Gerasimov had applied to the UN Committee under the Individual
 complaints procedure.Unfortunately, despite these positive 
measures, torture and other forms of ill-treatment continue to be widely
 used in Kazakhstan and further steps are needed to fundamentally 
improve the situation. Legal safeguards must be implemented 
consistently; Kazakhstan should establish an independent and effective 
mechanism for receiving complaints and conducting effective 
investigations into allegations of torture; and all torture victims 
should be awarded reparations from the state including compensation, 
rehabilitation, public apology and guarantees of non-repetition.This statement has been signed by the following human rights groups:Analytical Center for Interethnic Cooperation and Consultations (Georgia), member of the Civic Solidarity Platform (CSP member) Azerbaijan Human Rights Centre, CSP member Bir Duino – Kyrgyzstan Human Rights Movement, CSP memberCenter for Civil Liberties (Ukraine), CSP member Center for National and International Studies (Azerbaijan), CSP member Center for the Development of Democracy and Human Rights (Russia), CSP member Helsinki Citizens' Assembly – Vanadzor (Armenia), CSP member Helsinki Committee of Armenia, CSP member Helsinki Foundation for Human Rights (Poland), CSP member International Federation for Human Rights (France)International Partnership for Human Rights (Belgium), CSP member Kharkiv regional foundation Public Alternative (Ukraine), CSP member Legal Transformation Center (Belarus), CSP member Moscow Helsinki Group (Russia), CSP memberNGO Coalition against Torture of Kazakhstan NGO Coalition against Torture of Kyrgyzstan NGO Coalition against Torture of Tajikistan Office of Civil Freedoms (Tajikistan), CSP member Promo LEX Association (Moldova), CSP member Public Verdict Foundation (Russia), CSP member Ukrainian Helsinki Human Rights Union, CSP member World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT)


1 The description of Rasim Bayramov’s case is based on 
information submitted by the Kostanay branch of the Kazakhstan 
International Bureau for Human Rights and Rule of Law. The document was 
produced as part of the project “Action for Freedom from Torture in 
Kazakhstan and Tajikistan“ that is jointly carried out by the NGO 
coalitions against torture in Kazakhstan and Tajikistan, the Helsinki 
Foundation for Human Rights (Poland) and International Partnership for 
Human Rights (Belgium). The contents of this document are the sole 
responsibility of the organizations issuing it and can under no 
circumstances be regarded as reflecting the positions of the European 
Union, Open Society Foundations and National Endowment for Democracy.
2 This was the Article on “torture” in the 2008 version of the Criminal Code of Kazakhstan. 